he Daughters of Minyas[2]
But not Alcithoë, daughter of Minyas, who thinks the god’s rites must not
be received and rashly still denies Jove fathered Bacchus.
Her sisters share in her impiety.
The priest commands a festival. Slave girls,
released from duties, and their mistresses must put on fawnskins, free their
hair from bands, wear garlands, and take up the leafy thyrsus.
He says the god, if scorned, will have fierce wrath.
Matrons and brides obey. They leave their baskets,
their looms, their unspun wool, and offer incense while calling out the
epithets of Bacchus: Bromius, Loosener, the son of lightning, twice-born,
the lone two-mothered, Nysean,[3]
the long-haired son of Thyone, Lenaeus,[4]
the sower of the cheerful grape, Night-Worshipped, and father Eleleus,
Iacchus, Euhan[5]— all of the many names Greeks give you, Liber.
You’re always young—you’ll be a boy forever.
You’re heaven’s loveliest! When you’re without
your horns, you look just like a girl. The East is in your sway as far as
where the distant Ganges laps dark-complected India.[6]
Fearsome, you slayed the ax-wielder Lycurgus[7]
and Pentheus, sinners both. You cast the bodies
of Lydians to the sea. With painted reins you yoke a team of lynxes. You are
trailed by Bacchants, satyrs, and that drunk old man[8]
who holds his reeling legs up with a staff
and barely stays atop his bending donkey.
Each place you go resounds with young men’s shouts and women’s cries,
with beaten tambourines and hollow cymbals and the long-stemmed flute.
35
40
45
50
55
“Be mild and gentle,” beg the Theban women
who keep your bidden rites. Only the Minyads
stay in and spoil the revels with Minerva’s untimely woolwork,[9] using
thumbs to twist spun threads or standing near the loom to speed the slave
girls’ tasks. One sister, as her quick
thumb spins a thread, says, “While the others idle
and keep false rites, let us (devout to Pallas, a better goddess) ease our
hands’ good deeds with talk. Let’s take turns telling stories while the
others listen—time won’t seem so slow.”
They praise her words and tell her to go first.
It’s hard to choose a tale—she knows so many!
Yours, Babylonian Dercetis?[10] The people of Palestine think scales
enwrapped your legs, transforming you, and that you swam through
ponds.
Or rather how your daughter sprouted wings
and spent her final years in a white tower?
Or how a nymph used spells and potent herbs to change young men into
unspeaking fish— till she became one too? Or how that tree
that bore white berries once was stained by blood
and now bears dark? She likes the last one best since it’s less popular,[11]
and as her wool turns into thread she starts to spin her tale:
60
65
70
75
80
85
Pyramus and Thisbe
“Pyramus and Thisbe—he, most handsome
of youths, and she, most prized of eastern girls— had joining houses
where Semiramis,
they say, ringed her tall city with brick walls.[12]
They got to know each other first as neighbors, and soon love grew. And
though they wished to wed,
their fathers banned this. But they could not ban their spellbound
minds from burning equally.
No one else knows. They speak in nods and signs.
The more they hide their fire, the more it roars.
When it was being built, the wall that each
house shared had formed a slender crack. For years, this defect went
unseen—but what does love not notice? Lovers, you were first to spot it
and used it to converse. Your sweet talk passed through safely with the
merest whisper, Thisbe
standing on one side, Pyramus the other.
They each would breathe the other’s breath, then say: ‘Envious wall, why
stand between two lovers?
How easily you could let us join our bodies— if that’s too much, then open
for our kisses!
We’re not ungrateful. We are in your debt
since you relay our words to loving ears.’
They’d speak such things, in vain, from separate homes, then say farewell
at nightfall. Each gave kisses to their own side, but these could not pass
through.
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
“The next day’s dawn had cleared away night’s stars and the sun’s rays had
dried the frosty grass.
Coming to their accustomed place, they whisper soft plaints and plan to try,
in silent night, to give their guards the slip and go outside.
They’ll leave their houses and the city too.
So they won’t wander aimlessly in open fields, they will rendezvous at
Ninus’ tomb[13]
and hide beneath a shady tree—a lofty mulberry tree nearby, rich in white
fruit,
beside an icy spring. Both like this plan.
The sun seemed slow to go—it sank at last into those waves from which the
moon then rose.
Thisbe adroitly turns the hinge and steps into the darkness, slipping past her
household.
Her face was veiled. Arriving at the tomb,
she sat beneath the tree, boldened by love.
But look! A lion comes to quench her thirst with water from the spring, her
foaming jaws stained with the gore of freshly slaughtered cows.
Seeing her from afar by moonlight, Thisbe
fled to a hidden cave on frightened feet.
She left her veil, which slipped off as she fled.
The gulping lion slaked her thirst, then went back to the woods, finding the
slender veil,
now empty. With her bloody mouth she tore it.
“Pyramus set out later. When he saw the sure tracks of a beast in the deep
dust, his face turned pale. He found the blood-stained cloth, exclaiming,
‘This one night will kill two lovers!
She ought to have grown old! My soul is guilty.
I killed you, wretched girl! I ordered you to come to fearsome places in the
night, then failed to get here first. Mangle my body and gnaw my wicked
guts with your fierce bite,
whatever lions dwell beneath this crag.
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
Only a coward merely hopes for death.’
He carried Thisbe’s veil to the tree’s shade and showered its familiar cloth
with tears and kisses. ‘Drink my blood as well,’ he said,
plunging the sword he wore into his groin.
He pulled it from the warm wound as he died, then lay back on the ground.
His blood shot high, as when a pipe[14] bursts due to faulty lead, and
through the hissing hole squirt slender streams
of water as the spray bursts through the air.
The tree’s fruit, showered by this gore, became a darker shade. The roots
were soaked in blood, staining the hanging mulberries with crimson.
“Look! She returns, though frightened, so as not
to miss her lover. With her eyes and heart
she looks for him, eager to tell him what great dangers she’d escaped. She
recognizes the place and that tree’s shape, yet the fruit’s hue makes her
unsure. She’s baffled—is this it?
Still pondering, she spots his limbs, which writhe and strike the
bloody ground. She backs away, paler than boxwood, trembling like
water that quivers as a small breeze skims its surface.
After a pause, she recognized her love.
She wailed, then beat her blameless arms and tore her hair.
Embracing his beloved body, she filled his wounds with tears that mixed
with blood, then kissed his ice-cold lips as she cried out, ‘Pyramus, what
misfortune took you from me?
Pyramus, answer! Dearest, it’s your Thisbe
who calls you. Hear me! Lift your lifeless head!’
At Thisbe’s name, he opened up his eyes, heavy with death, took one last
look at her, then closed them. When she recognized her veil
and saw the empty scabbard, she exclaimed,
‘Your hand and love destroyed you, hapless boy.
I have a brave hand too, for this one deed, and love, which will put force
into my wounds.
I’ll follow you in death! I will be called
160
165
170
your death’s most wretched cause and its companion.
Only by death could you be torn from me, but death won’t tear you from
me. Both of us implore our grieving fathers, mine and his: Do not refuse
to let us share a tomb,
joined as we are by our unwavering love
and by our final moments. Tree, your boughs now shroud one piteous
corpse. Soon they’ll shroud two.
Retain these marks of slaughter. Always bear dark, mournful fruit as relics
of twin carnage.’
She spoke and held the sword, still warm with blood, low to her
chest, then fell on its sharp point.
Her prayers did sway the gods. They swayed the fathers.
The berries turn a dark shade when they’re ripe, and in a single urn those
ashes rest.”
175
180
185
190
195
Venus and Mars[15]
Her tale was done. There was a pause, and then
Leuconoë began, her sisters silent.
“Love overcame the Sun as well, whose light dims all the stars. The Sun’s
loves are my theme.
This god, it’s thought, first witnessed Venus’
affair with Mars—this god sees all things first.
This pained him, so he told her husband Vulcan about their trysts and where
the trysts took place.
The artist’s heart crashed down, as did the work his right hand held. At
once, he fashions slender
bronze chains and nets and traps that trick the eye.
The thinnest threads could not surpass such work, no spider web high on a
beam. He crafts them to trigger at the slightest touch or movement, then
hangs them skillfully around the bed.
When the adulterer and wife get in,
the bonds made by the husband’s novel art entrap and grip them both as
they embrace.
Vulcan at once threw wide his ivory doors, letting the gods inside. They lay
there, bound
disgracefully. One god[16] (but not a stern one) said he would like to
be disgraced like that!
The deities all laughed. For a long time this was the best-known tale in all
of heaven.
200
205
210
215
220
225
The Sun Rapes Leucothoë
“Recalling how the Sun informed on her,
the Cytherean goddess[17] makes him pay, and him who wrecked her
secret love affair she wrecks in turn with equal love. What good, son of
Hyperion, are your splendor, gleam, and radiant light? Now you whose
flames burn all
the lands are burned by strange new flames. And you, who ought to
watch all things, affix that gaze you owe the world upon a single virgin,
Leucothoë. Now in the east you rise
too soon, now sink beneath the waves too late.
Your gaze prolongs and lengthens winter’s hours.
Sometimes you fade, allowing your mind’s lapse to dim your light, and
scare the hearts of mortals.
It’s not because the moon has blocked your face that you’ve gone pale—
your love has caused this hue.
You favor her alone. The nymph from Rhodes[18]
and Clymene now hold no fascination, nor does Aeaean Circe’s gorgeous
mother,[19]
nor Clytië, who then longed for your bed, despite your scorn, and bore a
heavy wound.
Leucothoë made you forget them all.
Eurynome, the loveliest in that fragrant land, gave her birth. But as the
daughter grew, however much the mother topped the rest, by that much
did the daughter top the mother.
Her father, Orchamus, was Persia’s king,
the seventh in the line from ancient Belus.
230
235
240
245
250
255
260
“Far in the west the horses of the Sun have pastures where ambrosia grows,
not grass.
This tends their weary limbs and readies them
to toil again. As they consume their holy
fodder and night completes its turn, the god enters the bedroom of his love,
disguised as Eurynome, her mother. There, he sees Leucothoë amid
twelve slaves by lamplight.
She spins out silky thread, her spindle twirling.
He kissed her as a mother does her daughter, then said: ‘This matter’s
private. Slave girls, leave!
Don’t rob a mother’s right to speak in secret.’
The girls obeyed. No witness left, he spoke:
‘I’m he who measures out the lengthy year,
who sees all things, through whom earth sees all things, eye of the world.
Believe me, you are pleasing.’
She shakes with fright. In her alarm, the distaff and spindle fell out of her
slackened fingers.
Fear gave her beauty—he delayed no more
but took on his true form and normal brightness.
Though panicked at this sudden sight, the virgin was conquered by the
brightness of the god— she checked her cries as she endured his force.
“But Clytië, who’d loved the Sun too much,
is jealous. Spurred by anger at her rival, she broadcasts the affair and then
informs the ruthless father of his daughter’s scandal.
Leucothoë implores. She lifts her hands
up toward the Sun and says: ‘He forced himself on me against my
will!’ Her cruel father brutally buries her deep in the earth and piles on
top a mound of heavy sand.
The Sun dissolves this with his beams and opens
a path for you to free your buried face.
But, nymph, you could not raise your head—the earth had smothered it.
You lay there dead, a corpse.
265
270
275
280
285
290
It’s said the one who drives the flying horses had seen no sadder sight since
Phaethon’s flames.
With forceful rays he touched her frigid limbs,
attempting to restore their living warmth.
Since nature’s law does not allow such deeds, he scattered both the corpse
and spot with nectar, and spoke through cries: ‘Then you will touch the
air.’
The corpse at once began to melt away,
steeping the earth with holy nectar’s scent.
Slowly a shoot of frankincense emerged.
It pushed its roots down through the clods of earth and burst its top up
through the mound of sand.
“Love might excuse her grief, grief her informing, but still the lightgiver
no longer came to Clytië and ceased to sleep with her.
Out of her mind with love, she pined away.
Unable to endure her fellow nymphs,
she sat beneath the sky both day and night
on barren ground, her hair unveiled and tangled.
For nine whole days she took no food or drink, living on tears and undiluted
dew.
Fixed in that spot, she gazed up at the god
as he went by, bending her face toward his.
Her limbs, they say, embedded in the ground.
The sallow paleness in her skin was changed to bloodless leaves. The blush
became a flower[20]
much like a violet and hid her face.
Though gripped by roots, it turns itself to watch
the Sun and, now transformed, preserves its love.”
Her tale was done. It had enthralled her sisters.
One says it can’t have happened. One recalls that real gods are almighty—
but not Bacchus.
295
300
305
310
315
320
Salmacis Rapes Hermaphroditus[21]
The sisters hush. Alcithoë begins.
She runs the shuttle through the warp threads, saying: “I will not tell the
hackneyed loves of Daphnis,[22]
the shepherd boy of Ida, whom a nymph changed into stone in anger at a
rival—
such grief burns lovers. Nor will I recount
how gender-fluid Sithon, now a man
and now a woman, made new laws of nature.
I’m skipping you too, Celmis (metal now but once most faithful to the baby
Jove),
the rain-born Curetes, as well as Crocus,
transformed with Smilax into little flowers.
I’ll tell you something new to charm your minds.
“Now learn why Salmacis[23] is infamous, why it unmans and softens any
limbs
its sapping streams have touched. The fountain’s force is most
notorious, its cause obscure.
In Ida’s caves, the naiads nursed a son of Mercury and Venus in whose face
mother and father both could be discerned.
He took his name from them as well. At age
fifteen, he left his native hills, departing Ida, his nurse, to roam through
unknown lands.
It brought him joy to look at unknown streams.
Eagerness made his labor light. He goes
to Lycia and to Caria, Lycia’s neighbor,
325
330
335
340
345
350
355
and here he sees a pool of water, clear down to the soil below. It had no
reeds, no sterile sedges, and no sharp-tipped rush.
Its water was transparent, yet its banks
were ringed by living turf and verdant grass.
A nymph lived there, but not one fit for hunting or archery or racing. She
alone
of naiads was unknown to swift Diana.
Often, the story goes, her sisters told her,
‘Salmacis, lift a spear or painted quiver.
Balance your leisure with some rugged hunting.’
She does not lift a spear or painted quiver or balance leisure with some
rugged hunting, but bathes her lovely limbs in her own waters
and smooths her tresses with a boxwood comb
while gazing at the streams to see what suits her.
She drapes her body in translucent robes and lounges in soft leaves or on
soft grass.
She often would pick flowers. She by chance
was picking flowers when she saw the boy,
and, seeing him, desired to possess him.
She longed to go to him, but did not go till she composed herself. She
checked her clothes and face to make sure she looked beautiful,
then spoke:[24] ‘Boy worthiest to be thought a god— or if you are a
god, you could be Cupid— but if you’re mortal, blessed are your parents,
lucky your brother, fortunate your sister, if you possess one, and the nurse
who gave
her breasts to you. More blessed than all these
is your fiancée, if you’ve found one worthy.
If you’re engaged, I can have secret pleasure.
But if you’re not, let me be your betrothed and we can climb into our
marriage bed.’
The nymph grew quiet after this. A blush
marked the boy’s face, for he was ignorant of love. Even this blush was
most attractive, the hue of apples on a sun-drenched tree or painted ivory
360
365
370
375
380
385
390
395
or the moon eclipsed
and blushing underneath its gleam while cymbals
ring out in vain to help.[25] She begs and begs for kisses (just the kind he’d
give a sister!) and lifts her hand up to his ivory neck.
‘Stop, or I’ll flee,’ he said, ‘and leave this spot
and you.’ Salmacis grew afraid and told him,
‘I freely yield this place to you, my guest.’
She turned around, pretending to depart.
Yet even then she kept on looking back and hid by kneeling down behind
some shrubs.
The boy, as if unwatched, strolls here and there
around the open grass. He dips his toes, then his whole foot, into the
frisking stream.
At once, drawn by the cool, enticing water, he takes the soft clothes off his
youthful body.
Then truly he was pleasing. Salmacis
grows hot with longing for his naked beauty.
The nymph’s eyes glow, as when the sun’s clear orb is shining very brightly
and a mirror reflects its likeness. She can barely wait,
barely postpone her joys. Out of her mind,
she yearns to clasp him and cannot hold back.
He strikes his chest with open palms, then quickly dives in the water. As he
swims, he shines through the translucent stream as when clear glass
encases ivory statues or white lilies.
‘I’ve won! Now he is mine!’ the naiad shouts.
Her clothing tossed aside, she hurls herself into the waves. She holds him as
he struggles, steals kisses that resist. Her hands slide up
to fondle his unwilling chest. She pours
around him, now on one side, now the other.
He fights her, trying to escape, but she enfolds him like a snake seized by
an eagle (while hanging from the claws, it binds and squeezes
the head and feet and wide wings with its tail),
400
405
410
415
420
or else like ivy woven round tall trunks, or like an octopus beneath the sea
that grabs and holds its foe with girding arms.
The great-grandson of Atlas[26] is persistent
as he denies the nymph her hoped-for joys.
She grips him, clinging as if her whole body were fused to his. ‘Fight,
wicked boy,’ she said, ‘you won’t escape! Decree, gods, that no day will
let him part from me or me from him!’
Her prayer found kindly gods, for their two bodies merge and
combine. They wear a single face.
As when somebody grafts boughs onto bark and sees them meld together as
they grow, so when their limbs are joined in that unyielding
embrace, they are no longer two. Their form
is dual, and they can’t be called a woman nor yet a boy. They look like both
and neither.
“Seeing that those clear streams he’d entered male had made him half male
and had softened all
his limbs, Hermaphroditus stretches up
his hands and speaks, his voice no longer virile: ‘Father and mother, grant
your child a wish.
He carries both your names. Whoever goes into these waters male, let him
emerge
as half a man, made soft by this stream’s touch.’
Both parents, moved, fulfilled their biform child’s request and steeped the
spring with tainting drugs.”
425
430
435
440
445
The Daughters of Minyas Become
Bats
She’d finished. Still the sisters carry out their work, spurning the god and
violating
his festival—when suddenly they hear
the raucous noise of tambourines and curved horn flutes and ringing
cymbals. They smell saffron and myrrh. What happens seems incredible:
Their looms turn green. The hanging cloth sprouts leaves
like ivy, part becoming vines, the threads
changing to shoots. Out of the warp spring tendrils.
The purple gave its vivid hue to grapes.
It was that time when day was almost done, which you’d call neither
darkness nor the light,
when the night’s edges blend into the day.
The house seemed suddenly to shake, the lamps to flare, the rooms to glow
with golden fire, and the false phantoms of wild beasts to howl.
The sisters hide throughout the smoky house
in different spots to flee the fire and lights.
And as they seek the dark, a membrane wraps their narrow limbs. Thin
wings enclose their arms.
They can’t see in the dark how they have lost their former shape. They have
no feathers, yet
translucent wings upraise them. When they try to speak, their tiny
bodies send out tiny voices, a dirge they utter in thin squeaks.
They haunt not woods but homes. Hating the day, they fly at night and take
their name from evening.[27]
450
455
460
465
470
475
Ino and Athamas[28]
Then truly all of Thebes speaks Bacchus’ name.
His aunt[29] talks everywhere of that new god’s great strength. From all her
sisters, she alone had felt no grief, apart from what they’d brought her.
She glories in her children, in her marriage
to Athamas, and in her godly nursling.
Juno can see this, and she cannot bear it.
“My rival’s son,” she says, “could change Maeonian sailors and plunge
them down into the sea, could give a mother her son’s guts to tear,
could cover all three Minyads in strange wings.
Can Juno merely weep for grief she can’t avenge? Can this one power
satisfy me?
He teaches me himself what I should do— it’s right to learn from enemies.
He’s shown
more than enough what madness can achieve
by killing Pentheus. Why shouldn’t Ino not also feel its goads and through
her madness follow the pattern set by her own family?”
A pathway, dark with deadly yew trees, slopes
through speechless silence to the world below,
misty with breath from stagnant Styx. New shades and ghosts descend this
way when duly buried.
This place is colorless and cold and rough.
The recent dead don’t know which road will lead
to Styx’s city and the ruthless palace of gloomy Dis. That sprawling
city has a thousand entrances and open gates
480
485
490
495
500
505
510
on every side. As sea takes in the streams from all the lands, so that place
takes in each
and every soul. There’s always room for groups
of any size—the increase goes unnoticed.
The shades roam bloodless, boneless, bodiless.
Some crowd the forum, some their tyrant’s house.
Some imitate their erstwhile life and ply
their trades, while others suffer punishment.
Saturnian Juno leaves her heavenly throne, descending here[30]—so much
does she indulge hatred and wrath. As soon as she has entered, the
threshold groans beneath her sacred body;
Cerberus gives three barks from his three mouths.
She calls the Night-born sisters,[31] powers cruel and harsh. They sat before
the prison, bolted with adamant, and combed their snaky hair.
Seeing her in the mist, those goddesses
stood up. This place is called the Seat of Crime.
Here Tityos, stretched out nine acres wide, gives up his guts for tearing.
Tantalus, you grasp no water, and the tree above you withdraws. You,
Sisyphus, retrieve or push
the rock doomed to roll backward. Ixion
is spun, chasing and fleeing from himself.
The Danaïds, who dared to kill their cousins,[32]
fetch water that will ever drain away.
Juno observes them all with piercing eyes,
especially Ixion, then gazes back
at Sisyphus and says, “Why, of those brothers,[33]
must he bear endless pain, while a grand palace holds boastful Athamas?
He and his wife have always scorned me!” She explains why she’s
enraged, why she has come, and what she wants:
she wants the house of Cadmus to collapse, those sisters to drive Athamas
to crime.
She pours out orders, promises, and prayers.
515
520
525
530
535
540
545
She wears them out. When Juno’s speech was done,
Tisiphone flipped back her wild gray hair
to toss the snakes out of her face and said, “There is no need to ramble on—
consider your orders done. Depart from this unlovely realm and return to
heaven’s better air.”
Glad, Juno goes. Before she enters heaven,
Iris sends raindrops down to purify her.
Heinous Tisiphone at once takes up a blood-soaked torch and dons a cloak
stained red with gore, belting a twisted snake around it.
She leaves her home, accompanied by Grief,
Fear, Fright, and panic-faced Insanity.
They stood before the house of Athamas.
It’s said the doorposts quaked, their wood gone pale.
The sun took flight. Aghast at all these marvels,
Ino and Athamas prepared to flee,
but the grim Fury blocked the entryway.
She raised her arms, entwined with knotted snakes, and shook her hair. This
movement stirred the vipers.
Some slither round her shoulders; some, her chest.
They flick their tongues, hissing and spewing venom.
She plucks two vipers from her hair and hurls them with her deadly hand
into the hearts of Athamas and Ino, where they creep, exhaling noxious
breath. Their bodies are
unwounded, but their minds feel dreadful strikes.
She’d also brought some wondrous poisons with her: spittle from Cerberus,
the Hydra’s venom, mental delusion, dark oblivion,
and crime and tears and rage and love of slaughter.
She’d ground them all and mixed them with fresh blood, then cooked
them in a cauldron stirred with hemlock.
She pours this maddening poison on the quaking chests of them both. It jars
them to their core.
550
555
560
565
570
575
580
585
Whirling her torch around repeatedly,
she made a ring of quickly moving fire.
Her charge fulfilled, she goes in victory back to the empty halls of mighty
Dis, where she unbelts the snake she had put on.
Instantly, Athamas is filled with fury.
Inside his hall, he shouts, “Come, comrades! Stretch your nets
around these woods! Just now I saw a lion with twin cubs!” Out of his
mind, he hunts his wife as though she were a beast.
Baby Learchus laughs, his small arms raised.
His father steals him from his mother’s arms
and spins him two, then three times through the air, as though a sling, then
wildly strikes the baby’s face on hard stone. The mother, now crazed too,
from grief or from the poisons, howls and flees.
She raves, hair streaming. With bare arms she cradles you,
Melicertes, as she cries, “Hail, Bacchus!”
Juno scoffs at the name of Bacchus, saying, “Let this be how your nursling
blesses you!”
A bluff projects above the sea. Its base,
hollowed by surf, shields waves below from rain.
Its tall peak stretches over open water.
Strengthened by madness, Ino clambers up and leaps, unflinchingly, into
the sea with her dear bundle, making a bright splash.
Venus takes pity on her granddaughter,[34]
whose toils were undeserved, and goes to coax her uncle: “Neptune, sea
god, you who won the realm beneath the sky: I am requesting great
things, I know, but pity my relations,
whom you see tossed upon the vast Ionian,
and add them to your gods. I hold some sway over the sea—I once was
foam congealed within its depths. My Greek name comes from this.”[35]
Neptune assented to her prayer. He stripped
their mortal part and gave them fearful grandeur.
590
595
600
605
He changed their names as well as their appearance: He’s now Palaemon;
she, Leucothoë.[36]
A band of Theban women followed Ino and saw her final footprints on the
ledge.
They’re certain she is dead. They strike their chests, tear hair and
clothes, mourning the house of Cadmus.
They blame the goddess—short on justice, lavish with cruelty toward her
rival. Juno could not bear their scorn and said, “You’ll be the chief
reminders of my cruelty.” She fulfilled this.
One woman, deeply loyal, said, “I’ll follow my queen into the sea!” She
made her leap but could not move—she clung, fixed to the bluff.
A second, when she tried to strike her chest,
could feel her arms grow stiff mid-strike. A third, who’d stretched
her arms out to the waves, became a rock whose hands reach out to those
same waves.
You could have seen the fingers of another instantly harden as she tore her
hair.
Each keeps the gesture in which she’d been caught.
Some of them change to birds, and even now in that same gulf the Theban
women skim the surface of the water with their wings.
610
615
620
625
630
635
Cadmus and Harmonia Become
Snakes[37]
Not knowing that his daughter and young grandson
are sea-gods, Cadmus now is crushed by grief,
his string of hardships, and the many wonders that he has seen. The founder
leaves his city, as if the place’s luck, not his, oppressed him.
He wandered widely with his wife, who’d joined
his exile, till they reached Illyria’s bounds.
And as they talk, weighed down by age and woes, tracing their house’s fate
and their own toils, Cadmus declares, “That must have been a sacred
snake my blade pierced back when I came from Sidon
and sowed the earth with viper teeth, strange seeds.
If gods avenge it with such dogged wrath, I pray to be a snake myself,
stretched out in one long belly.” As he speaks, he is stretched out in one
long belly, like a snake.
He feels scales growing on his hardened skin
as his dark body mottles with blue spots.
He falls prone on his chest, and bit by bit his legs fuse, thinning to a
rounded point.
Only his arms remain. He lifts these arms
as tears flow over his still human face.
“Come here, most wretched wife,” he says. “Come here.”
Touch me while there is something left of me.
And hold my hand while I still have a hand, before the snake takes over all
of me.”
He wanted to say more, but suddenly
his tongue was split in two, and no words came.
640
645
650
Whenever he would try to cry aloud,
he’d hiss. This was the voice that nature left him.
His wife is shouting, pounding her bare chest:
“Unhappy Cadmus! Stay! Remove these marvels!
What is this, Cadmus? Where’s your foot, your shoulders, your hands, hue,
face? And, as I speak, the rest?
Gods, why not make me too a snake like this?”
She’d spoken. Licking his wife’s cheeks, he curled
into her dear embrace, as if by habit,
and hugged the neck he knew so well. This frightens each person there (for
they had brought attendants).
But as she strokes the crested snake’s smooth neck, there suddenly are two.
They creep, coils laced,
into the nearby forest’s dens. They still
aren’t shy of humans and would never harm one.
They’re peaceful snakes, remembering what they were.
655
660
665
670
675
680
Perseus and Atlas
Nevertheless, their grandson brought great cheer to them in their new
form. India, vanquished,
revered him, and Greece honored him with shrines.
The only holdout is the son of Abas, Acrisius, who shared his line with
Bacchus.[38]
He locks him out of Argos, raising arms against a god. He thinks he’s not
Jove’s son.
He thinks Jove did not father Perseus either,
whom Danaë conceived from golden rain.
But soon Acrisius (for truth will out) regrets his violence against the god as
well as his rejection of his grandson.
One now resides in heaven, while the other
soars through the supple air on whizzing wings, carrying famous spoils: the
snake-haired monster.[39]
He hovered over Libya’s sand, when drops of blood fell from the Gorgon’s
head to earth,
which animated them as varied serpents.
And this is why that land is snake-infested.
The winds clash, driving him now here, now there, across the boundless
sky, just like a raincloud.
Flying throughout the world, he gazes down
at distant lands far from the sea. Three times
he saw cold Arctos, three times Cancer’s claws.[40]
He often was borne eastward, often westward.
And now, at sunset, fearing to entrust himself to night, he lingers in the
west,
685
690
695
700
705
710
Atlas’ realm, and tries to sleep a little
till Lucifer calls forth Aurora’s light, and she, in turn, the chariot of day.
Here Atlas, son of Iapetus, surpassed all humans in his bulk. He ruled the
earth’s
far margin, where the ocean waves receive
the sun god’s panting steeds and weary wheels.
His thousand flocks and thousand herds meander across the grass. No
neighbors press his land.
He has a tree[41] whose leaves shine bright with gold
and shelter golden boughs and golden fruit.
Perseus told him, “Stranger, if high birth is what impresses you, Jove is my
father.
Or if it’s feats you prize, you will prize mine.
I ask for welcome here and rest.” But Atlas
recalls an ancient oracle that Themis
of Delphi gave: “A time is coming, Atlas, when your tree will be robbed of
gold. The spoils will bring Jove’s son[42] acclaim.” Afraid of this, Atlas
had fenced his orchards with thick walls,
set up a mighty dragon[43] to protect them, and driven off all
strangers from his land.
He says to Perseus, “Get going! Neither your famous feats (all lies!) nor
Jove can help you here.” He adds force to his threats and goes
to throw him out by hand as Perseus
tries stalling, mixing gentle words with bold ones.
He’s not as strong—for who’s as strong as Atlas?
“Though my goodwill,” he said, “means little to you, accept a gift.” He
looked away, then raised
Medusa’s crusted face in his left hand.
Atlas becomes a mountain still as huge.
His beard and hair are woods; his hand and shoulders, ridges. What was his
head becomes the peak.
His bones are rock. And then on every side
he grew immensely high—you willed this, gods. 715
The sky and all its stars now rest on him.
720
725
730
735
740
745
Perseus and Andromeda
Aeolus locked the winds in Etna’s jail, and Lucifer arose, high heaven’s
brightest, herald of work. Then Perseus ties the wings
back to his feet and straps on his curved sword.[44]
His whirring sandals slice the sunlit air.
Crossing through countless nations down below, he glimpses Ethiopia,
realm of Cepheus, where Ammon had unjustly ordered blameless
Andromeda to suffer for the tongue
of her own mother.[45] Perseus sees her arms tied to hard rock (if gentle
winds weren’t blowing her hair, and if her eyes weren’t wet with tears, he
would have thought she was a marble statue[46])—
then catches fire unwittingly. He’s stunned,
seized by the image of her visual beauty, and nearly forgets to beat his
airborne wings.
Landing, he says, “You don’t deserve these chains, but those that join
together eager lovers.
Tell me, I beg, your name, what land this is,
and why you wear those bonds.” At first she’s silent, not daring, as a virgin,
to address a man. She would have used her hands to veil her modest face
if they had not been chained.
All she could do was fill her eyes with tears.
But he keeps pressing. So as not to seem unwilling to confess misdeeds, she
tells him what land it is, her name, and how her mother was much too
confident in her own beauty.
As she still speaks, the waves crash and a monster comes towering
above the boundless sea.
Its chest encompasses wide tracts of water.
750
755
760
765
770
775
780
The virgin screams. Her father and her mother lament, both wretched—she
with better cause.
They cannot help her, but (as suits the crisis)
they weep and wail and hug her pinioned body.
The stranger tells them, “Later you can cry at length, but now there’s little
time to help her.
I’m Perseus, son of Jove and her whom Jove
made pregnant in her jail with fertile gold,
the Perseus who subdued the snake-haired Gorgon and dared to wing his
way through heaven’s air.
Of course, you’d want me as your son-in-law before all others, yet I’ll try,
gods willing,
to add a service to my fine credentials—
on one condition: if my manly valor[47]
can save her, she’ll be mine.” They both agree, for who would hesitate?
They plead with him and promise him their kingdom as a dowry.
Look! Like a swift ship plowing its sharp beak
through water, rowed by young men’s sweating arms, the monster’s
sternum slices through the waves— as distant from the cliffs as Balearic
slings[48] can shoot spinning lead across the sky.
At once, the young man kicked against the earth
and sprang up to the clouds. The monster sees his shadow on the waves and
rages at it.
As when Jove’s bird[49] has seen a snake sunbathing inside an empty field
and grabs its back,
fixing its greedy talons in its scaly
neck so it cannot twist its deadly jaws— so Perseus swiftly dove through
empty air, charging the roaring monster’s back, and sank his sword hiltdeep
into its shoulder. Badly
wounded, it now rose high into the air,
now sank into the waves, now thrashed just like a wild boar scared of dogs
that bark all round it.
785
790
795
800
805
810
815
On brisk wings Perseus flees its greedy bites, stabbing his curved sword
into any place
exposed—its shell-caked back, its ribs, the spot where its tail narrows
and becomes a fin.
The monster vomits up a blend of brine and blood that sprays the wings and
weighs them down.
No longer did he dare to trust his soaking
sandals. He saw a rock whose peak juts out
whenever waves are calm, but when they swell is underwater. Landing here,
he held the ledge with his left hand and plunged his sword three times,
then four, into the monster’s guts.
Shouts and applause ring through the shore, through homes of gods
above. Cassiope and Cepheus, her parents, are delighted, and they hail
him as son-in-law, their bulwark, and their house’s savior. The virgin,
freed from chains, comes forth,
his labor’s prize and cause, while he himself
draws saltwater to wash his conquering hands.
So the hard sand won’t harm the snaky head, he piles soft leaves and
seaweed on the ground, then lays Medusa facedown on this pillow.
The living seaweed’s spongy pith absorbed
the monster’s force and hardened at her touch.
Its stems and leaves could feel a strange new stiffness.
Sea nymphs attempt this wondrous feat on more seaweed, rejoicing when
the same thing happens,
and often cast the seeds across the waves.
Corals retain this nature still and harden when touched by air. What is a
pliant plant beneath the waves becomes a stone above it.
With turf he makes three altars to three gods[50]—
the left to Mercury; the right is yours,
war virgin; and the middle one is Jove’s.
He slays a cow for Pallas and a calf for Wing-Foot, and a bull for heaven’s
king.
820
825
He snatches up[51] Andromeda at once,
but not her dowry—she’s reward enough
for his great exploit. Love and Hymen shake the wedding torches. Fires glut
themselves on heaps of incense. Garlands hang from ceilings.
Everywhere lyres, flutes, and songs resound—
the joyous symbols of a happy mind.
The doors are opened to reveal the whole gold hall, where Ethiopia’s elite
enter the splendid banquets of their king.
830
835
840
845
850
855
Perseus and Medusa
Once they have eaten and relaxed their minds
with Bacchus’ kind gift, Perseus asks
about the place: its way of life, its people, its customs, and the mettle of its
men.
Cepheus answered all of this, then said, “Now, brave man, tell us,[52]
please, what manly valor
and skill it took to steal that snake-haired head.”
Agenor’s scion[53] tells how, near cold Atlas, there is a place secured with
thick stone walls.
Inside its entrance lived twin sisters, daughters of Phorcus, who both shared
a single eye.[54]
He slipped his hand beneath this as they passed it
and swiped it cunningly, then reached the barren and tree-spiked crags
where Gorgons have their homes.
Throughout the fields and paths he could see statues of humans and wild
beasts that had been changed
to stone when they returned Medusa’s gaze.
Yet he had seen Medusa’s looks reflected in his bronze shield, and as she
slept he snatched her head clean off. Swift-flying Pegasus sprang, with
his brother, from their mother’s blood.
He adds, and does not lie, his long quest’s dangers, the seas and lands
he’d seen from up on high, the stars he’d soared to on his whirring wings.
His story ceased too soon—they wanted more.
A nobleman asks why she is the only
one of her sisters who has snake-twined hair.
860
865
The guest said: “Since you seek things worth the telling, here is the reason:
Once acclaimed for beauty, she was the fervent hope of many suitors.
And her most striking feature was her hair.
I found a young man who alleged he’d seen it.
They say the sea-god[55] raped her in Minerva’s temple. Jove’s daughter
turned away, chaste eyes veiled by her aegis. This was not unpunished.
She changed the Gorgon’s hair into foul serpents.
And even now, to stun her foes with fright,
she wears upon her chest those snakes she made.”[56]
5
10
15
20
25
30
BOOK FIVE[1]
The Battle for Andromeda[2]
As Danaë’s heroic son holds court among the Ethiopians, a shouting
throng fills the royal hall; their cries don’t hail the wedding feast but signal
ruthless war.
The feast transformed at once into a feud—
you’d liken it to when a raging wind unsettles and whips up a calm sea’s
waves.
Rash Phineus led them, urging them to arms.
He shook his bronze-tipped spear of ash wood, crying,
“I’m the avenger of my stolen bride!
Not wings, nor Jove transformed into fake gold, can rescue you from me!”
He’s poised to throw, when Cepheus says, “What are you doing, brother?
What rage drives you to crime? Is this your thanks
for such good deeds, your dowry for her rescue?
In truth, it wasn’t Perseus who stole her, but dreadful Nereïds and ramhorned
Ammon[3]
and that sea monster sent to gobble up my flesh and blood! Yes, she was
snatched from you
when left to die. Cruel man, perhaps you want her dead to revel in my
grief? You weren’t content to see her bound and not to help her, although
you were her uncle and fiancé!
You’re pained that someone freed her, so you’ll steal
his prize? If you thought it so grand, you should have won it from
those cliffs where it was chained!
But he did win her, saving me from childless old age. Now let him keep
what he has earned by merit and by oath. Know this: he wasn’t
preferred to you but to her certain death.”
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Phineus, silent, gazes back and forth from him to Perseus, weighing his
strike.
He wavered, then with all his rage-fueled strength he hurled his spear at
Perseus, in vain—
it hit the couch. Then Perseus at last
leapt up. His furious spearcast would have burst that hateful chest had
Phineus, that villain, not ducked behind a shrine for cover—shameful!
The spear did strike, piercing the brow of Rhoetus,[4]
who fell. When it was yanked out of his skull, he spasmed, spraying
blood across the feast.
Then the mob truly boils with lawless rage, hurling their spears. Some think
that Cepheus should die with his new son, but he’s withdrawn,
calling on Faith and Justice and the gods
of guests to witness that he tried to stop this.
The warrior Pallas comes! She wraps her aegis around her brother,[5]
deepening his courage.
Athis, from India,[6] was there. Limnaeë,
child of the river Ganges, bore him under
her glassy stream. Sixteen and in his bloom, he had outstanding beauty that
rich clothes enhanced. He wore a gold-trimmed purple cloak, and golden
necklaces adorned his neck.
A curving headband graced his myrrh-soaked hair.
Though he was skilled at hitting distant targets with his cast spear, he was a
better bowman.
Then too his hand bent back his pliant bow, when Perseus grabbed a hot log
from the altar
and beat his face until the bones were broken.
Assyrian Lycabas,[7] his most devoted companion, who did not hide his true
love, could see the face he’d praised writhing in blood, and wept as
underneath that bitter wound
Athis breathed out his life. He grabbed the young man’s bow and
cried, “Your fight is now with me!
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
You won’t gloat long in this boy’s death, from which you’ll win not praise,
but scorn!” As he still spoke, his piercing arrow shot off of the bowstring
but missed its mark, caught in a fold of clothing.
Acrisius’ grandson turned on him
the hooked sword proven by Medusa’s murder and sank it in his chest. As
he was dying, eyes swimming in dark night, he searched for Athis
and lay beside him, taking to the shades
the consolation that they died together.
Look! Phorbas of Syene, Metion’s son, and Libyan Amphimedon, both
keen
to fight, slipped in the blood that bathed the ground.
That sword kept them from getting up again—
it punctured Phorbas’ throat, the other’s ribs.
But Perseus does not use the curving sword to strike at Eurytus, the son of
Actor, who wields a double ax. Instead, he hoists
a massive wine bowl, huge and richly sculpted, and smashes it down
on him. Eurytus lies on his back and vomits up red blood, pounding his
dying head against the earth.
Perseus piles up victims: Polydegmon,
sprung from Semiramis’ line; Caucasian
Abaris; long-haired Helices; Lycetus, from near Spercheus; Clytus;
Phlegyas.
He tramples over heaps of dying men.
Phineus dares not meet him hand to hand,
but hurls his spear. It misses, hitting Idas,
who shuns the war, in vain, remaining neutral.
Scowling at heartless Phineus, he says, “Since I must now take sides, accept
a foe of your own making, Phineus—pay me wound
for wound!” He pulled the spear from his own body, aimed, then
collapsed as blood poured from his limbs.
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
Then Clymenus’ sword struck down Hodites, first in that land behind the
king. Hypseus stabs Prothoenor. Perseus stabs Hypseus.
Aged Emathion was there, upright
and god-fearing, but too old to wage war.
Yet with his words he battles and rebukes them, damning their wicked
weapons. As he clasped the shrine with trembling hands, Chromis cut off
his head. At once, it rolled onto the altar,
where with its half-dead tongue it uttered curses while breathing out its life
amid the flames.
Here were twin brothers, Broteas and Ammon, unbeaten in boxing gloves.
But boxing gloves
cannot beat swords. They fell dead at the hand of Phineus, as did a
priest of Ceres, Ampycus, who wore white bands on his brow.[8]
Lampetides, you too weren’t fit for battle, but sang and played the lyre,
works of peace.
Ordered to hymn the wedding feast, you stood
far off now, clutching your unwarlike plectrum.[9]
Paetalus laughed and told you, “Sing the rest to Stygian shades!” then
pierced you through the temple.
As you collapsed, your dying fingers grazed
your lyre’s strings and struck a mournful note.
But fierce Lycormas does not leave your death unpunished. Snatching off
an oaken door bolt, he broke the neck of Paetalus, who crumpled to earth
just like a slaughtered calf. A Libyan
named Pelates reached for the other bolt,
but as he reached, a spear stabbed his right hand— Corythus from
Marmarica had thrown it.
While he was stuck there, Abas disemboweled him.
Dying, he dangled from the door, hand pinned.
Then Melaneus, Perseus’ ally, falls, and Dorylas, the Nasamones’
richest, so rich that no one owned more land than he or could pile up as
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
many heaps of wheat.
A launched spear landed crosswise in his groin,
a fatal place. Bactrian Halcyoneus,
who dealt the wound, watched him gasp out his life, eyes rolling back. “Of
all your land,” he said, “keep what you lie on.” Then he left the corpse.
In vengeance, Perseus pulled the bloody spear
from the hot wound and turned it on its author, skewering him from
nose to neck.
His luck
held as he slaughtered Clytius and Clanis, who shared one mother but bore
different wounds: he hurled a spear through Clytius’ thighs,
while Clanis bit a javelin with his mouth.
Mendesian Celadon and Astreus fell— their mother was from Palestine,
their father unknown. Aethion fell, once shrewd at seeing the future, but
false omens had deceived him.
The armor-bearer of the king, Thoactes
fell, and Agyrtes, shameful father-killer.
Perseus is spent, but more remain, all eager to crush one man. Around him,
plotting swarms do battle for an unjust, faithless cause.
The king (loyal in vain), the queen, and his
new bride all favor him, their pealing shrieks drowned out by crashing arms
and dying groans.
Bellona bathes the household gods in blood, polluting them, and gives the
war new life.
Now Phineus and his thousand followers
hem Perseus in, alone. Their weapons fly, thicker than hail in winter, past
his flanks and eyes and ears. Leaning against a large stone column to
protect his rear, he keeps
the hostile swarms at bay as they come charging.
Syrian Molpeus charges from the left, and from the right Arabian
Echemmon.
175
180
185
190
195
200
205
As when a tigress, spurred by hunger, hears two lowing herds in separate
glens—unsure
which one to strike, she longs to strike them both— so Perseus did
not know if he should guard his right or left. He pierced the leg of
Molpeus, driving him off, and gladly let him flee.
Echemmon offers him no pause. He rages,
swinging his sword with reckless force. Intent on slashing Perseus’
tall neck, he breaks his blade against the column’s edge. Rebounding, it
cuts its master’s throat. And yet the blow lacked the velocity to kill him.
Shaking
with fear, he lifts his unarmed hands, in vain: Perseus brings his
hooked sword down upon him.
Knowing his manly valor could not last against that throng, Perseus said,
“Since you compel me, I must seek help from my foe—
friends, look away!” He raised the Gorgon’s face.
“Find someone else your marvels can impress,”
yelled Thescelus. He aimed his deadly spear, then held this pose once he
became a statue.
Next Ampyx lunged his sword at the brave chest
of Perseus. And as he lunged, his right
hand stiffened and could not move back or forth.
But Nileus, who claimed to have been fathered by seven-channeled Nile
and held a shield engraved with seven streams, some gold, some silver,
said, “Perseus, behold my family’s source!
Take this great solace to death’s silent shades: that such a man destroyed
you.” As he spoke, his final words grew faint—you’d think he opened his
mouth to speak, and yet no voice came out.
Then Eryx scolds the rest: “It’s your weak minds that stupefy you,
not the Gorgon’s force!
Attack with me! We’ll dash against the ground this youngster who is
wielding magic weapons!”
He started to attack—earth gripped his feet.
210
215
220
225
230
235
240
245
He froze, fixed stone, a statue donning armor.
They’d earned such vengeance, but Aconteus, who fought with Perseus, just
glimpsed the Gorgon amid the fray and hardened into rock.
Believing he still lived, Astyages
struck him with his long sword; it rang out sharply.
Astyages is stunned, then changes too.
His marble face retains his look of shock.
It’d take too long to name the common soldiers: two hundred had survived
the fight, two hundred
glanced at the Gorgon and were turned to stone.
Phineus at last regrets his unjust war.
What can he do? Seeing the varied statues, he knows his men and calls their
names, requesting their help. Incredulous, he taps the bodies
nearby him—they are stone! He looks askance,
then reaches up, a vanquished suppliant, arms lifted sideways. “Perseus,
you’ve won,”
he says. “Put down your monster. Lay aside the petrifying face of your
Medusa—
I beg of you! No grudge or lust for rule
drove me to fight—I battled for my bride.
Good deeds gave you the better claim, but mine was first. I’m sorry that I
did not yield, brave man. Grant me my life and take the rest.”
He spoke, not looking at the one he begged.
Perseus answered: “Craven man, I’ll grant what I am able. Have no fear—
this gift is great for one so impotent. No sword will harm you. I’ll make
you a monument
to last through time. You’ll be on view forever inside the palace of
my father-in-law to cheer my wife with her fiancé’s likeness.”
He spoke, then moved Medusa round to meet the fearful gaze of Phineus,
who tried
to look away again. But his neck stiffened;
his tears became hard stone. Inside the marble, he still looked timid with a
suppliant expression, passive hands, and abject face.
250
255
260
Perseus, Proetus, and Polydectes
As victor, Perseus enters his ancestral
walls[10] with his bride, and there the champion avenges his
unworthy grandfather
by striking Proetus, who’d deposed his brother through arms and claimed
Acrisius’ throne.
Arms and a stolen throne could not, however,
defeat that snaky monster’s glaring eyes.
You, Polydectes, king of small Seriphus,[11]
were not won over by the manly valor that young man proved through
myriad toils and woes.
Hard-hearted, you possess unbending hatred.
Your unjust wrath is endless. You disparage
his fame and claim he feigned Medusa’s death.
“It’s true,” says Perseus, “and I will prove it.”
“Friends, guard your eyes!” Then with Medusa’s face he turned the king’s
face into bloodless stone.
265
270
275
280